From New York Times, I'm Michael
Barbaro. This is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> Today,
in President Trump's first State of the
Union of his second term,
>> [music]
>> he offered a rosy portrait of a country
that has lost confidence in his
leadership
and relentlessly baited [music]
Democrats as they try to win back
control of Congress this fall.
>> [music]
>> My colleague, chief Washington
correspondent David Sanger, takes
[music] us inside the room.
>> [music]
>> It's Wednesday, February 25th.
>> David, good evening.
Hey, Michael. We're back again.
We're back again. This is your second
episode, I think, in 2 days.
Uh it's about 11:30 p.m. on Tuesday
night, and the president just wrapped
his State of the Union address, and it
was a very long State of the Union
address.
Oh, yeah. It was an hour and 47 minutes.
You know, for years we thought that Bill
Clinton set the record at 99 minutes.
>> Right. And people couldn't believe how
verbose he was.
But Donald Trump has shown consistently
he can go longer.
>> [laughter]
>> And he did go longer. This was the
longest
by New York Times calculations State of
the Union in history. Yep.
Well, David, as you know well, every
State of the Union, no matter its
length, feels deeply grounded in the
moment in which it is delivered. And I
want to start there with you, with the
stakes of this speech for President
Trump as we went into this speech on
Tuesday night.
Well, he had a lot to get done because a
year ago he was coming in fresh from a
big electoral victory.
People were kind of tired of the Biden
years.
Now he came into this one with polls
showing that voters have turned on
President Trump pretty severely.
That more than 60% are saying that his
priorities are not their priorities.
They're concerned about affordability
and inflation.
They're worried about tariffs and were a
little bit relieved when the Supreme
Court seemed to step in and say the
president overstepped his authority.
They're concerned that we've put a good
percentage of our navy and air force
off the coast of Iran for what may be an
invasion that people are still pretty
apprehensive about.
And there's a midterm election looming
and a lot of very nervous Republicans
who have backed President Trump sitting
in that audience worried about what it
is that they'll be stuck with come
November.
So, he had a lot of hurdles to go across
tonight. Right. I would say that an
economy Americans are extremely anxious
about, a tinderbox potential war in the
Middle East, a tariff ruling that went
against him, all in an election year
makes for about as high stakes a State
of the Union as you can really imagine.
So, take us into the room as this speech
gets underway.
Mr. Speaker, the President OF THE UNITED
STATES.
SO, THE PRESIDENT walked in with the
usual introductions each one of which
leads to a burst of applause.
There are protests among some of the
Democrats.
But you know, he immediately diffused
the big issue, which was how would he
deal with the Supreme Court that he had
denounced as unpatriotic
just days before.
>> Right.
>> [applause]
>> He went up and shook the hands of a
couple of the justices,
the ones who he said a few days ago
their families would be ashamed of them.
Well, thank you very much, everybody.
It's really
an honor.
And then, after that brief moment of
surprise diplomacy, he takes to the
podium.
Less than 5 months from now, our country
will celebrate an epic milestone in
American history, the 250th anniversary
of our glorious American independence.
He does. And, you know, he opens up with
a an immediate reference to the 250th
anniversary of the United States. This
July 4th, we will mark 2 and 1/2
centuries of liberty and triumph,
progress, and freedom
in the most incredible and exceptional
nation ever to exist on the face of the
earth. And
you've seen nothing yet. We're going to
do better and better and better. This is
the golden age of America. And I thought
for a minute there, well, he's going to
really go do a unifying speech here
built around that theme.
>> Mhm. The theme of a country that was in
the throes of revolution has had
divisions before and came together. When
I last spoke in this chamber about 12
months ago, I had just inherited a
nation in crisis
with a stagnant economy, inflation at
record levels,
a wide-open border.
It's not quite what we got.
>> Mhm. Rampant crime at home, and wars and
chaos all over the world. And then, he
launched into what turned out to be
a play in three parts, right? The first
part was a familiar recitation of what
he thinks his accomplishments were. The
middle was a highly partisan attack on
Democrats. And the end was sort of a
return to these unifying themes, the
250th anniversary, war heroes, and
America that can do anything it wants to
do.
Okay, well, let's start with the first
of those, Trump's accomplishments in his
telling.
Well, in his telling, America has come
back from being basically dead on
arrival in the emergency room. But
tonight, after just 1 year, I can say
with dignity and pride that we have
achieved a transformation like no one
has ever seen before
and a turnaround for the ages. It is
indeed a turnaround for the ages.
>> [applause]
>> And not surprisingly, Michael,
he ran through a number of inflated
claims that are pretty familiar to
anybody who listens to Donald Trump at
rallies or at press conferences. The
roaring economy is roaring like never
before. He talked about economic growth.
And 100%
of all jobs created under my
administration have been in the private
sector.
He talked about how many jobs were
created in the private sector without
mentioning the fact that those cut many
in the public sector and overall job
growth is pretty low. He talked about
winning, particularly winning new
investment in the United States. In 12
months, I secured commitments for more
than $18 trillion pouring in from all
over the globe.
Well, nothing close to that has come in
in the past year. It looks like he is
adding together and maybe inflating
commitments that came from different
chief executives talking about their
investment over the next decade or two.
And most importantly,
>> months my administration has driven core
inflation down to the lowest level in
more than 5 years. And in the last 3
months of 2025,
it was down to 1.7%.
>> [cheering]
>> He made his case that inflation was
finally under control.
And that was the closest he got to the
affordability argument that we know he
hates making because he thinks it's a
nonsense argument, but that every one of
his aides tells him he's got to address.
It's the one thing that the polls show
anger Americans of all stripes.
A short time ago, we were a dead
country. Now, we are the hottest country
anywhere in the world, the hottest.
>> [cheering]
>> What was really striking about this was
if you compare his claims to the way
people feel, what they tell pollsters,
there was an element of unreality to
this. One of the primary reasons for our
country's stunning economic turnaround,
the biggest in history, where the Dow
Jones broke 50,000 4 years ahead of
schedule, and the S&P hit 7,000
where it wasn't supposed to do it for
many years,
were tariffs. And it's around this
point, David, that Trump formally turns
to a subject we knew he would need to
address,
the tariff ruling by the Supreme Court
justices. Like you said, he had shaken
their hands as he walked in, but then it
seemed like he kind of unshook their
hands in this actual speech. And then
just 4 days ago, an unfortunate ruling
from the United States Supreme Court. It
just came down. Came down. Very
unfortunate ruling.
Well, I actually thought, Michael, that
compared to what he said last week
when he was making specific accusations
against the individual justices
who had ruled against him.
He was pretty moderate. So, despite the
disappointing ruling, this powerful
country saving is saving our country the
kind of money we're taking in.
But, this didn't last long.
Congressional action will not be
necessary. It's already time tested and
approved. And he basically made the
argument, "I'm going to reimpose all of
those tariffs under different
authorities."
And he moved on.
Moving forward, factories, jobs,
investment, and trillions and trillions
Right. I did think it was notable that
the president, when he said he was going
to reimpose the tariffs
said he didn't feel like he needed
congressional action to do that because
the context, of course, is that he's in
a room filled with members of Congress
who, in theory, should covet the ability
to influence this decision. The Supreme
Court said it's their job, not the
president's. And instead, the president
looks at all these members of Congress
and basically says, "I don't need you.
I'm going to do this anyway."
You know, that's a theme throughout his
presidency. This is not a president who
wakes up in the morning and thinks about
bills he's going to go push through
Congress.
This is a president who wakes up in the
morning and thinks about what
authorities he has or can claim to have
so that he can do things by executive
order.
Because we finally have a president who
puts America first. Put America first. I
love America. And then, the president
turns to what David you have termed the
second act of this speech, the partisan
act. For decades before I came along
we had the exact opposite. Especially as
he turns to the topic of immigration.
Well, you know, Michael, if you think
that the first part was sort of
delivered by the good Donald Trump, the
one who seemed sort of jovial,
the tone changed as soon as he got into
this middle section.
Under Biden and his corrupt partners in
Congress and beyond, it reached a
breaking point with the green new scam,
open borders for everyone.
They poured in by the millions and
millions from prisons, from mental
institutions. They were murderers He
immediately goes into setting up this
kind of rhetorical motif in which he
attacks Democratic cities and he begins
to run through his now familiar list of
ills he thinks Democrats have brought to
the United States.
But when it comes to the corruption that
is plundering it really
it's plundering America. There's been no
more stunning example than
Minnesota.
So, he blamed the Somalis in Minnesota
for fraud. This is the kind of
corruption that shreds the fabric of a
nation and we are working on it like you
wouldn't believe.
He went after sanctuary cities. He
defined his immigration effort as an
effort to get the worst of the worst out
and we're getting them the hell out of
here fast. We don't want them.
>> [cheering]
>> Skimming over right away others with no
criminal record who have been deported
and of course the shootings of two
American citizens in Minneapolis.
The only thing standing between
Americans and a wide open border right
now is President Donald J. Trump and our
great Republican patriots in Congress.
Thank you.
>> [applause]
>> Right, I kind of feel like he was trying
to reclaim the topic of immigration
which has gone from being a strength
into being a vulnerability for him, but
in the process
he did not represent what's actually
unfolded under his leadership.
But he had a deeper goal here, which was
to set up the Democrats, who of course
were sitting on their hands while the
Republicans were applauding each one of
these.
One of the great things about the State
of the Union is how it gives Americans
the chance to see clearly what their
representatives really believe.
And then, at one point, after he has
built up to this crescendo, So tonight,
I'm inviting every legislator to join
with my administration in reaffirming a
fundamental principle.
If you agree with this statement, then
stand up and show your support.
The first duty of the American
government is to protect American
citizens, not illegal aliens.
He asked everyone to stand if they agree
with him,
knowing that he would get the image of
Republicans who were standing and
Democrats who remained sitting.
Isn't that a shame? You should be
ashamed of yourself not standing up. You
should be ashamed of yourself.
So if you ever wanted a moment where you
could sort of capture the division
between the Trump Republicans and the
Democrats,
President Trump was creating it right
there for the cameras.
And then, eventually, the Democrats take
the bait. To end deadly sanctuary cities
that protect the criminals and enact
serious penalties for public officials
who block the removal of criminal
aliens. In many cases, drug lords And
not surprisingly, Representative Ilhan
Omar, who he has attacked repeatedly,
begins yelling at him, and he has a few
exchanges with her. Right, at one point
she says
"You killed American citizens." She
wants to distinguish between what he's
arguing, which is there's a problem with
illegal immigration, and what she says
is the problem, which is "You guys are
so overzealous that you're hurting
American citizens." Right. This was
exactly the contrast that I think
President Trump wanted to bring up. This
was the moment he wanted for the
cameras.
Because what he was building toward once
the yelling laid down was this one line
that may
remain as the one that people remember
from the speech. These people are crazy.
I'm telling you. They're crazy.
>> [cheering and applause]
>> "These people are crazy, I'm telling
you." And of course, he's thinking of
that as the theme for the midterm
elections. Right. Instead of trying to
justify all of his administration's
conduct in places like Minneapolis, for
example, where ICE enforcement has
become a real liability for him, he is
attempting to turn this around and make
it a liability for Democrats. It's
deeply unclear whether that will work,
but he's saying "They remain out of the
mainstream. This is not about me, this
is about them in an election year."
That's right, Michael, but it's also
where the disconnect shows up again.
Because polls will show
that Americans are largely sympathetic
with the idea of throwing out illegal
immigrants who are violent, who have
criminal records, and so forth.
It tapers off pretty fast when you have
people who've been in the United States
for a long time, no criminal record,
built their own businesses, or students,
or something like that. And it
completely falls off when you ask about
the ICE enforcement activity that we've
seen take place including the killings
of American citizens. And the way he
dealt with the last was simply not to
mention it.
Okay, David, we're going to take a quick
break. When we come back, we're going to
talk about how the president eventually
gets to that third act of this speech
by way of
a journey through foreign affairs.
So, we'll be right back.
>> [music]
>> We're proudly restoring safety for
Americans at home and we are also
restoring security for Americans abroad.
Our country
>> So, David, about an hour into the
speech, President Trump turns to
international affairs
and his role in bringing about the end
to a whole lot of conflicts
as he puts it.
Well, yes, that's right, Michael,
because Our country has never been
stronger. My first 10 months, I ended
eight wars
including Of course, he repeats the
somewhat dubious claim that he has
single-handedly ended eight wars.
And there are a couple he can take
credit for,
but what's important here is the
Democrats kind of laughed at him.
They're sick people.
And the Republicans all applauded him on
it.
He then turned to what was clearly his
biggest success.
Under the ceasefire I negotiated, every
single hostage, both living and dead,
has been returned home. Can you believe
it?
>> [applause]
>> He talked about the agreement that
brought all the hostages, living and
dead, out of the hands of Hamas. That
was a truly remarkable accomplishment.
Nobody thought it was possible.
>> [applause]
>> And then overstated the ceasefire that
has followed, which has been pretty
rocky. Mhm. Then he just glided by what
4 years ago was the dominant subject of
the State of the Union. And we're
working very hard to end the ninth war,
the killing and slaughter between Russia
and Ukraine, where 25,000 soldiers are
dying each and every month. The Russian
invasion of Ukraine, which happened 4
years to the day before this speech. A
war which would have never happened if I
were president. Would have never
happened.
And while President Biden was out there
4 years ago getting bipartisan applause
for his promise to stick with Ukraine
thick and thin, in this case the
president simply said he's working on
it. That there have been awful
casualties and he just wants to bring
the war to an end. Right, he steadfastly
refused to offer any real support to
Ukraine. Which was the one thing the
Ukrainians were looking for today on the
fourth anniversary. Just the message
[clears throat] that we're with you.
>> Mhm.
And they didn't get it.
As president, I will make peace wherever
I can, but I will never hesitate to
confront threats to America
wherever we must.
And then the president pivots to the
international subject that all of us
were wondering whether he would get to,
and if he got to it, how thoroughly
he would broach it, which is Iran.
>> [applause]
>> For decades it had been the policy of
the United States never to allow Iran to
obtain a nuclear weapon.
Many decades. That's right. And I'd say
this was in some ways
the lost opportunity of the speech. Hmm.
Just explain that.
Well, he brushed by the topic of Iran so
quickly that if you were a casual
listener, you would never have known
that we've got something like a third of
the US Navy and a good deal of the
American air power that's available
around the globe parked off the Middle
East and that within a few days we could
well be in a situation where we're in an
enduring conflict with Iran. They were
warned to make no future attempts to
rebuild their weapons program in a
particular
nuclear weapons, yet they continue
to starting it all over. We wiped it out
and they want to start all over again.
So, he ran through Iran's offenses over
the many years. He raised the
possibility that they were trying to
reconstitute their nuclear program.
Which was pretty remarkable because 8
months ago he was saying he obliterated
the nuclear program and they wouldn't be
able to restart it for years. Right, in
a previous attack. That's right. That
was in the June attack on the three
major enrichment sites.
They've already developed missiles that
can threaten Europe and our bases
overseas and they're working to build
missiles that will soon reach the United
States of America. He talked about their
missile developments. He talked about
32,000
Iranian protesters who had been killed
during the uprisings last month. We
stopped them from hanging a lot of them
with the threat of
serious violence but this But what was
strange about this, Michael, was
he never used the moment to explain what
he was trying to accomplish with all of
that military firepower sitting off of
Iran. Was he trying to stop the nuclear
program or overthrow the regime or
protect the protesters? He simply did
not say. And that's the one thing that
everybody was listening for the most. He
said the Iranians had not given him the
one thing he wanted to hear. with them.
They want to make a deal, but we haven't
heard those
secret words. We will never
have a nuclear weapon. We will never
have a nuclear weapon. Well, of course,
the Iranians have said that many times.
In fact, their foreign minister tweeted
it out a few hours before the speech.
But the problem isn't what the Iranians
say, it's what they've been caught doing
at various points over the past few
years. I have to say, David, I had a
slightly different reaction to hearing
this section of the speech, and I almost
never
differ with you. But I heard what felt
like a
all the above rationale from the
president in stating his disgust with
Iran. And taken together, it did feel
like the beginning of a rationale for
military action against Iran. He came up
with a casus belli, or actually four or
five. Mhm. But he never told us how the
application of
military power, how bombing the Iranians
would change this. And as we've talked
about before,
you know, you might be able to destroy
some facilities, but it's not clear how
you protect protesters, for example, by
dropping bombs in Tehran. We're also
restoring American security and
dominance in the Western Hemisphere,
acting to secure our national interests.
>> It's interesting, at least it was to me,
that the president chose to juxtapose
his implicit threats against Iran with
his
already very explicit actions against
Venezuela. That's right.
And America's armed forces overwhelmed
all defenses and utterly defeated a
enemy. He talked about that operation.
And this was an absolutely colossal
victory for the security of the United
States and it also opens up a bright new
beginning for the people of Venezuela.
He then brings into the hall Chief
Warrant Officer 5, Eric Slover.
The helicopter pilot who was part of the
Maduro raid. While preparing to land,
enemy machine guns fired from every
angle
and Eric was hit very badly in the leg
and hip, one bullet after another.
He observed
>> And who took incredible amounts of fire,
his leg was shattered.
>> Then even as he was gushing blood, which
was flowing back down the aisle,
helicopter lands at a steep angle.
>> He lands the helicopter despite the fact
that he's bleeding and the president
describes this in somewhat gory detail.
So we have a surprise.
Eric and Amy
In recognition of Eric's actions above
and beyond the call of duty.
And then of course they give the pilot
the Medal of Honor right there in front
of all of Congress and everybody who's
watching.
>> nation's highest military award, the
Congressional Medal of Honor.
>> [applause]
>> So that was a little bit of a brilliant
turn because how could the Democrats not
stand for the awarding of a medal to
somebody that courageous?
And how could they not stand when he did
similar awards for elderly veterans some
100 years old.
Navy fighter pilot Royce Williams served
in World War II, Korea, Vietnam flying
more than 220
who had fought in World War II and Korea
and Vietnam.
But tonight at 100 years old, this brave
Navy captain is finally getting the
recognition he deserves.
He was a legend. So, at that moment, he
sort of matched his martial tendencies
Mhm. with a celebration of great
heroism.
I'm curious, David, as a veteran of
State of the Unions and also as someone
who's covered military affairs in your
day, how you thought about all of the
military awards that the president
bestowed during this speech. I tend to
think of those as awards typically given
in solemn, much more intimate
ceremonies.
This is the most public possible venue,
a president's State of the Union, and
thus has a bit of a partisan tinge. A
Purple Heart was given out,
Congressional Medals of Honor were given
out.
Was that celebrating American heroism?
Was that in some ways exploiting it? I
think there was an element of
showmanship and an element of
exploitation to it as well because what
he was doing
was combining the experiences of these
people in
just wars, World War II, you know, and
so forth.
Korea, where we were fighting for a
nascent democracy
and
managing to try to merge that with what
many would argue were less clear uses of
American power And potentially even
illegal. And potentially illegal and
we're headed to that debate about Iran
for sure if he went ahead. So,
this is sort of taking the Ronald Reagan
idea of putting prominent guests and
heroes in the State of the Union
audience and moving it to the next level
by awarding them these medals in front
of the entire Congress.
So, David, take us to the end of this
speech, the third act, when
President Trump takes a stab
at unity.
Michael, the third act?
250 years is a long time in the life of
a nation,
but in other sense, it's really a mere
moment in the eye of history.
Picked up on the 250th anniversary of
America.
Everything our nation has done,
everything we have achieved, has been
the work of those few great lifetimes.
So, he talked about America as a young
nation. Americans lifted humanity into
the skies on the wings of aluminum and
steel. Then he talked about America as
an innovative nation.
All of this and so much more is the
enduring legacy, unmatched glory,
of the hardworking patriots who built
and defended this country,
and who still carry the hopes and
freedoms
on all of humanity's backs. Then he
talked about Americans as people
who could never be defeated, whose ideas
and spirit sort of carried through and
could do anything in the world. There is
no challenge Americans cannot overcome.
No frontier too vast for us to conquer.
No dream too bold for us to chase.
No horizon too distant for us to claim.
For our destiny is written by the hand
of providence,
and these first 250 years were just the
beginning.
Who did that sound like?
Joe Biden, who used to say it every
speech.
>> Right. There's nothing Americans can't
accomplish. And in some ways, it was not
like Donald Trump, but he delivered it
with some passion.
And it made you realize that he has
within him
the ability to talk in unifying terms.
He just can't help himself. And our
future will be bigger, better, brighter,
bolder, and more glorious than
ever before.
Thank you. God bless you. And God bless
America.
>> [applause]
>> So, in the end, thinking back to the
stakes of this all,
at this moment in the economy, at this
moment in the immigration battles in the
country, and potentially at the start of
a new war,
did he meet the moment? You know, I
don't think, Michael, that he moved the
needle.
He had to go convince Americans in this
speech
that the evidence indicated that they
didn't need to feel this economically
insecure.
I don't think he met that.
He had to go lay out a rationale for why
we may be at war in the next couple of
days. He certainly didn't do that.
He had to go make the case
that the Republican Party had a full
policy agenda that was ready to go
between now and the midterm elections.
And there was very little policy in this
speech.
So, my overall sense is President Trump
talked about how he believes the country
should view him,
>> [music]
>> rather than how it does view him.
And that raised the question of whether
or not he is yet in tune
with the rest of the nation.
>> [music]
>> Well, David,
it is now
almost 1:00 a.m.
It's time for you to go to bed. It
certainly is. Thank you very much.
Appreciate it. Thanks much, Michael.
>> [music]
>> Shortly after President Trump's speech,
the newly elected governor of Virginia,
Abigail Spanberger, delivered the
Democratic Party's rebuttal. You have to
ask who benefits from his rhetoric, his
policies, his actions, the short list of
laws he's pushed through this Republican
Congress. Spanberger portrayed the
president as a self-dealing egomaniac.
Somebody must be benefiting.
He's enriching himself, his family, his
friends. The scale of the corruption is
unprecedented.
Cozying up to foreign princes for
airplanes and billionaires for
ballrooms, putting his name and face on
buildings all over our nation's capital.
This is not what our founders
envisioned, not by a long shot.
And said that at the end of the day,
both the president and his agenda are
deeply out of touch with regular
Americans. Is the president working for
you? [snorts]
We all know the answer is no.
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know
[music]
On Tuesday, House Republicans voted down
a bill that federal regulators said
could prevent deadly midair collisions
like the one last year in Washington
D.C.
>> [music]
>> that killed 67 people.
The bill, which would have required
planes to carry advanced [music]
location tracking technology, was
originally endorsed by the Defense
Department and adopted by the Senate in
December.
But the Defense Department has since
withdrawn its support [music]
citing concerns over national security
and costs.
That prompted just enough House
Republicans to vote [music] against the
bill to block its passage.
And
I'm coming on to say it is day 24
[music]
since our mom
was taken
in the dark of night from her bed.
And every hour and minute and second
and every long night has been an [music]
agony. In her latest plea with the
public, Savannah Guthrie, the Today show
co-host, said that her family was
offering up to $1 million
>> [music]
>> for information that leads police to
find her mother, Nancy.
Someone out there knows something that
can bring her home.
Somebody knows.
And we are begging [music] you
to please come forward now. Despite a
massive more than 3-week [music] long
investigation, police appear to have few
leads about who abducted Nancy Guthrie
on February 1st in Arizona [music]
or where she is.
In the video, Savannah Guthrie
acknowledged that her mother may already
be dead.
We also know that
she may be lost. She may already be
gone.
But we need to know where she is.
We need her to come home.
Today's episode was produced [music] by
Ricky Nvetsky, Olivia Nat, Mary Wilson,
and Austa Chaturvedi.
It was edited by Rachel Quester [music]
and Liz Obelin.
Contains music by Diane Wong and Dan
Powell and was engineered by Chris
[music] Wood. Special thanks to Afi
Shapiro.
>> [music]
[music]
>> That's it for the daily.
I'm Michael Barbaro.
See you tomorrow.